OpenScanHub blogpost (#914)
packit/packit.dev: posts/openscanhub-prototype/index.md

---
title: "SAST using OpenScanHub is here!"
date: 2024-07-30T08:46:18+02:00
authors: lbarczio
tags:
  - copr
  - srpm
  - sast

>   - openscanhub

Reviewer: [Shift Left](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shift-left_testing) may be another tag here.

---

We are excited to announce a new experimental feature in our service: the integration of Static
Application Security Testing (SAST) using [OpenScanHub](https://openscanhub.fedoraproject.org/).

OpenScanHub is a service that runs various static analyzers on RPM packages - by default `Cppcheck`,
`ShellCheck`, the static analyzers embedded in `GCC` and `Clang`, and the `find-unicode-control` tool.

Let's have a look at the functionality we are bringing with this!

<!--truncate-->

> 

Reviewer: Can we have a "why" section here? We need to tell users why this feature is enabled for `rawhide`. May be my talk at [DevConf](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rcuIvAttWgY) can give some context here.

Author: added, PTAL

## Functionality

This functionality is designed to enhance software security and reliability by automatically
scanning for vulnerabilities and issues in code submitted through pull requests.

> It is enabled using the configuration option

Author: tried to reword it, PTAL

[`osh_diff_scan_after_copr_build`](/docs/configuration#osh_diff_scan_after_copr_build),
which is currently set to `true` by default. This option enables differential scanning

> in OpenScanHub for Copr builds triggered by pull requests, given that there is also a corresponding

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in OpenScanHub for Copr builds triggered by pull requests, given there is also a corresponding
```

Copr build job with `trigger: commit` in the configuration with configured branch
matching to the target branch of the pull request. This setup helps Packit
obtain the base build necessary for differential scanning, resulting in more accurate
detection of issues introduced by the pull request.

To enable this feature, ensure you have Copr builds for commits configured
(and both Copr builds for PRs and commits run for `fedora-rawhide-x86_64`).
If not, you can add a job into `jobs` section in the Packit configuration as shown below:

```yaml
- job: copr_build
  trigger: commit
  branch: main
  targets:

>     - fedora-all

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - fedora-rawhide
```

If OpenScanHub is the only reason for enabling, I don't really see a reason to put a load on Copr with unnecessary builds.

```

This configuration assumes that pull requests are typically merged into the `main` branch.
It can be further tweaked to preserve the Copr project (and not create a temporary one,
see more details [here](https://packit.dev/docs/configuration/upstream/copr_build#optional-parameters))
or use a custom Copr project in your Copr namespace (more details
[here](https://packit.dev/docs/configuration/upstream/copr_build#using-a-custom-copr-project)).

Here is an example of a scan showing some new findings:

![Example findings](openscanhub-findings.png)

> 

Reviewer: Also, we should mention somewhere how you may run the scans through CLI i.e. `packit scan-in-osh` subcommand.

## Conclusion

As this is an initial prototype, the configuration and functionality may evolve based on user feedback
(e.g. reporting the actual results of a scan).

> We invite you to try out this feature and [share your thoughts](/#contact) with us.

Reviewer 2: Maybe open up a discussion thread [here](https://github.com/packit/packit-service/discussions) and link it? Especially since the mail is screwed :D

You can take the GitHub Merge Queue [discussion](https://github.com/orgs/community/discussions/46757) as an inspiration, they even list known issues there (maybe it's a good place for mentioning the issue with dynamic deps).

Author: good point, will do

---
title: "SAST using OpenScanHub is here!"
date: 2024-07-30T08:46:18+02:00
authors: lbarczio
tags:
  - copr
  - srpm
  - sast
  - openscanhub
  - shift left
---

We are excited to announce a new experimental feature in our service: the integration of Static
Application Security Testing (SAST) using [OpenScanHub](https://openscanhub.fedoraproject.org/).

OpenScanHub is a service that runs various static analyzers on RPM packages - by default `Cppcheck`,

> `ShellCheck`, the static analyzers embedded in `GCC` and `Clang`, and the `find-unicode-control` tool.

Reviewer 3: As far as I know, @siteshwar has disabled Clang Analyzer in the default scanning profile because it was missing fundamental features, such as the support for `__attribute__((cleanup))`, which resulted in negative feedback from Fedora developers: https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/4260

Reviewer: It is disabled as of now, but is enabled by default and can be enabled any time in the future. Also, I am yet to enable `find-unicode-control`, but that should not stop us from listing them as potential analyzers.

Reviewer 3: > It is disabled as of now, but is enabled by default

I do not understand the above sentence.  Either the default scanning profile contains the tool or not.  I checked a recent OSH task triggered by Packit and it did not use Clang Analyzer according to scan properties: https://openscanhub.fedoraproject.org/task/2459/log/containers-common-0.60.0-1.20240731120946597433.pr2107.7.g12f3adf3/scan.ini

Reviewer 3: If you enable it in the future, it can be advertised in a future blog post.  But saying in this blog post that `clang` is used by default, despite you disabled it a few weeks ago, is misleading.

Author: agreed, will change it. I took it from https://openscanhub.fedoraproject.org/ so it should be probably changed there as well.

Reviewer: In that case, please remove `find-unicode-control` too.

Reviewer: On a second thought, can we change "by default uses"  to "by default can use" and list all the analyzers OSH can use. While this sentence is technically correct right now, it is subject to change. And we are showing a relatively limited capability of OSH. We can probably mention it in the next sentence about which analyzers are enabled right now.

## Functionality

The functionality is designed to automatically
scan for vulnerabilities and issues in code submitted through pull requests.
It is controlled using the configuration option
[`osh_diff_scan_after_copr_build`](/docs/configuration#osh_diff_scan_after_copr_build),
which is currently set to `true` by default.
However, even with this option enabled, the differential scanning feature in OpenScanHub
will only run for users who have also configured Copr builds with the `trigger: commit`
setting and have matching target branches in their pull request and job configurations.
This setup is crucial as it allows Packit to access the base build necessary for differential
scanning, leading to more precise detection of issues introduced by the pull request.

To utilise this feature, you must ensure that Copr builds for commits are configured,
along with Copr builds for pull requests, both set to run for `fedora-rawhide-x86_64`.
If you haven't enabled Copr builds for commits yet, you can add the following job
configuration to the `jobs` section in your Packit configuration:

```yaml

> - job: copr_build
>   trigger: commit
>   branch: main
>   targets:
>     - fedora-rawhide

Reviewer 4: Don't we want to suggest stable project?

```suggestion
- job: copr_build
  trigger: commit
  branch: main
  preserve_project: True
  targets:
    - fedora-rawhide
```

Reviewer 4: Oh, I see you are mentioning this later but this can help to avoid possible issues on projects without regular contributions...

```

> This configuration assumes that pull requests are typically merged into the `main` branch.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This configuration assumes you merge your pull requests into the `main` branch.
```
I wasn't sure about the meaning at first...

It can be further tweaked to preserve the Copr project (and not create a temporary one,
see more details [here](https://packit.dev/docs/configuration/upstream/copr_build#optional-parameters))
or use a custom Copr project in your Copr namespace (more details
[here](https://packit.dev/docs/configuration/upstream/copr_build#using-a-custom-copr-project)).

Here is an example of a scan showing some new findings:

![Example findings](openscanhub-findings.png)

:::tip

Besides this newly introduced integration with Packit Service, you can also submit scans locally using Packit CLI,
see more details in [docs](/docs/cli/scan-in-osh).

:::

## Conclusion

> As this is an initial prototype, the configuration and functionality may evolve based on user feedback

Reviewer 4: What about explicitly suggesting also to let us know if they need any OSH configuration to be included?

(e.g. reporting the actual results of a scan).
We invite you to try out this feature and [share your thoughts](https://github.com/packit/packit/discussions/2371) with us.

> For more information on setting up this feature, see the info above.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

Not sure if this needs to be here since the text is not too long. But maybe we can add a new "Setup" header to the text to make it easier to find.
